= What is transitions?

transitions is a ruby state machine implementation based on Rick Olson’s
ActiveModel::StateMachine. It was extracted from ActiveModel and turned
into a gem when it got the axe in commit {db49c706b}[http://github.com/rails/rails/commit/db49c706b62e7ea2ab93f05399dbfddf5087ee0c].

I really encourage you to try {state_machine}[https://github.com/pluginaweek/state_machine] before using this gem. Currently I have no time to maintain the gem, if you want to add some new features - contact with me.

== Quick Example

 require 'transitions'
 
 class Product
   include Transitions
 
   state_machine do
     state :available # first one is initial state
     state :out_of_stock, :exit => :exit_out_of_stock
     state :discontinued, :enter => lambda { |product| product.cancel_orders }
   
     event :discontinued do
       transitions :to => :discontinued, :from => [:available, :out_of_stock], :on_transition => :do_discontinue
     end
     event :out_of_stock do
       transitions :to => :out_of_stock, :from => [:available, :discontinued]
     end
     event :available do
       transitions :to => :available, :from => [:out_of_stock], :guard => lambda { |product| product.in_stock > 0 }
     end
   end
 end

== Automatic scope generation

`transitions` will automatically generate scopes for you if you are using AR:

Given a model like this:

  class Order < ActiveRecord::Base
    include ActiveRecord::Transitions
    state_machine do
      state :pick_line_items
      state :picking_line_items
    end
  end

you can use this feature a la:

  >> Order.pick_line_items
  => []
  >> Order.create!
  => #<Order id: 3, state: "pick_line_items", description: nil, created_at: "2011-08-23 15:48:46", updated_at: "2011-08-23 15:48:46">
  >> Order.pick_line_items
  => [#<Order id: 3, state: "pick_line_items", description: nil, created_at: "2011-08-23 15:48:46", updated_at: "2011-08-23 15:48:46">]

== Using on_transition

Each event definition takes an optional "on_transition" argument, which allows you to execute methods on transition.
You can pass in a Symbol, a String, a Proc or an Array containing method names as Symbol or String like this:

  event :discontinue do
    transitions :to => :discontinued, :from => [:available, :out_of_stock], :on_transition => [:do_discontinue, :notify_clerk]
  end

== Using with Rails

This goes into your Gemfile:

 gem "transitions", :require => ["transitions", "active_record/transitions"]

… and this into your AR model:

 include ActiveRecord::Transitions

=== A note about persistence
The property used to persist the models’ state is named <tt>state</tt> (really!),
which should be a string column wide enough to fit your longest state name.
It should also be mentioned that <tt>#save!</tt> is called after every successful event.

== Event execution flow

On an event, with our quick example product going from <tt>:available</tt> to
<tt>:discontinued</tt> it looks like this:

1. <tt>baby_ninja.discontinue!(:reason => :pirates)</tt>
2. call <tt>:exit</tt> handler of <tt>:available</tt> state
3. call <tt>:guard</tt> of <tt>:available to :discontinue</tt> transition within <tt>#discontinue</tt> event
4. call <tt>#event_failed(:event)</tt> and abort unless <tt>3.</tt> returned <tt>true</tt>
5. call <tt>:on_transition(:reason => :pirates)</tt> of <tt>:available to :discontinue</tt> transition within <tt>#discontinue</tt> event
6. call <tt>:enter</tt> handler of <tt>:discontinue</tt>
7. call <tt>#event_fired(:available, :discontinue)</tt>
8. call <tt>#write_state(machine, :discontinue)</tt>
9. call <tt>#write_state_without_persistence(machine, :discontinue)</tt>
10. call <tt>baby_ninja#:success</tt> handler method of <tt>#discontinue</tt> event

=== A note about events

When you declare an event <tt>discontinue</tt>, two methods are declared for
you: <tt>discontinue</tt> and <tt>discontinue!</tt>. Both events will call
<tt>write_state_without_persistence</tt> on successful transition, but only the
bang(!)-version will call <tt>write_state</tt>.

== Documentation, Guides & Examples

- {Online API Documentation}[http://rdoc.info/github/qoobaa/transitions/master/Transitions]
- Krzysiek Heród (aka {Netizer}[http://github.com/netizer]) wrote a nice
  {blog post}[http://dev.netizer.pl/transitions-state-machine-for-rails-3.html]
  about using Transitions in ActiveRecord.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 Jakub Kuźma, Timo Rößner. See LICENSE for details.
